8
1
0
2

l

u

J

5
2

]

D

C

.

n

i
l

n

[

1
v
6
3
6
9
0

.

7
0
8
1

:

v

i

X

r

a

Impact of lag information on network inference

Nicol´as Rubido1 and Cristina Masoller2 , ∗

1Universidad de la Rep´ublica, Instituto de F´ısica de la Facultad de Ciencias, Igu´a 4225, 11400 Montevideo, Uruguay
2Departament de Fisica, Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya,
Rambla Sant Nebridi 22, ES-08222 Terrassa, Barcelona, Spain

Extracting useful information from data is a fundamental challenge across disciplines as diverse
as climate, neuroscience, genetics, and ecology. In the era of “big data”, data is ubiquitous, but
appropriated methods are needed for gaining reliable information from the data. In this work we
consider a complex system, composed by interacting units, and aim at inferring which elements
inﬂuence each other, directly from the observed data. The only assumption about the structure
of the system is that it can be modeled by a network composed by a set of N units connected
with L un-weighted and un-directed links, however, the structure of the connections is not known.
In this situation the inference of the underlying network is usually done by using interdependency
measures, computed from the output signals of the units. We show, using experimental data recorded
from randomly coupled electronic R¨ossler chaotic oscillators, that the information of the lag times
obtained from bivariate cross-correlation analysis can be useful to gain information about the real
connectivity of the system.

INTRODUCTION

Network inference involves discovering, from observa-
tions, the underlying connectivity between the elements
of a complex system. Reliable inference is important
because it allows to understand, predict, and control
complex behaviours. Main challenges involve the fact
that usually one can only observe a single scalar vari-
able (but the evolution of the system depends on other
–unobserved variables), during a limited time-interval,
with limited resolution, and with considerable measure-
ment noise.
In recent years many network inference
methods (or network reconstruction) have been proposed
[1–15], whose success depends, not only on the previous
knowledge of the system (e.g., weighted or unweighted
interactions, directed or undirected,
instantaneous or
lagged), but also, on data availability (e.g., hidden nodes
or unobserved variables and limited temporal or spatial
resolution).
Relevant examples of network inference include brain
functional networks and climate networks.
Brain
functional networks, which have
shed light
into
many neurological
conditions,
such as Alzheimer,
Parkinson or Epilepsy, are inferred from recorded
brain signals (magneto-encephalography, MEG, electro-
encephalography, EEG, and functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging, fMRI) by correlating diﬀerent brain re-
gions and linking the ones that exhibit the highest cor-
relations [16–18]. Similarly, climate networks have shed
light into climate phenomena (such as long range tele-
connections or atmosphere-ocean interactions) by cor-
relating time-series of climate variables and linking the
geographical regions that exhibit signiﬁcant correlation.
[19–23].
When trying to infer a system’s connectivity, the sta-
tistical similarity of the time series recorded from diﬀer-
ent units is commonly measured by using bivariate time

series analysis, such as cross-correlation or mutual in-
formation. Typically, time series are mutually lagged in
order to ﬁnd the maximum of the similarity measure, Sij ,
but the information contained in the set of lag times, τij
has not yet been used to infer the links of the network. In
climate network studies, the lag times have been used to
infer the directionality of the links; in addition, lag anal-
ysis has received attention in the context of ﬁnancial and
ecological data analysis [24–26]. In this work we investi-
gate if the discovery of the real interactions in a complex
network can be improved if these lag times are taken
into account. The working assumption is that, when the
strength of the coupling is increased, the transition to
synchronized behavior occurs [27]. During this transi-
tion, the lags between the time-series of nodes which have
direct interactions can be smaller than the lags between
nodes that are not directly coupled. In other words, if
two nodes have a direct link between them, they can syn-
chronize with a lag that is smaller than the lag between
nodes that are not directly connected, and this diﬀerence
can be used for improving network inference.

Here, we analyze under which conditions the lag in-
formation can be used to complement the information of
the similarity measure for improving the discovery of the
existing links (true positives), for decreasing the number
of wrongly inferred links (false positives), for improving
the detection of non-existing links (true negatives) and
for decreasing the number of mistakes due to undetected
links (false negatives).

We investigate an experimental dataset from a network
of electronic R¨ossler chaotic oscillators [6] composed by
N = 12 units, which are randomly coupled with L = 19
links. The real underlying adjacency matrix, Aij ,
is
known, while an inferred matrix, A∗
ij , is extracted by
using bivariate time series analysis. We propose three
criteria for classifying links as existing or non-existing
and, by comparing the inferred and the known coupling

 
 
 
 
 
 
matrices, we discuss the eﬀectiveness of the diﬀerent cri-
teria for uncovering the real connectivity of the system.
We conclude that when using an OR criterion, namely,
one that detects a link when either a small lag or a high
similarity value is found, non-existent links are almost
always correctly discarded. However, this criterion also
discards direct links more than the other two criteria.

DATA

The data was described in [6]. It is generated from N =
12 R¨ossler electronic oscillators randomly coupled with
L = 19 links. The coupling between units i and j is kAij ,
where k is the coupling strength and Aij is the adjacency
matrix [Aij = 1 if the oscillators i and j are coupled and
Aij = 0 if they are not]. The dataset contains the time
series recorded for 31 values of the coupling strength (the
minimum is k = 0 and the maximum is k = 0.15). Each
time series has 30000 data points.
In order to reduce
the eﬀects of noise, each time series is divided into non-
overlapping segments of length T . To avoid transient
eﬀects the ﬁrst segment is disregarded, and the following
segments are used for the analysis. The results presented
are obtained with T = 5000, so we have ﬁve segments
for computing the mean values and the error bar of the
measures described in the following section.

METHODS

2

2. AND: The link between i and j exists (A∗
ij = 1)
if τij < τth and Sij > Sth , else, the link does not
exist (A∗
ij = 0).

3. OR: The link between i and j exists (A∗
ij = 1) if
τij < τth or Sij > Sth , else, the link does not exist
(A∗
ij = 0).

For these criteria, the thresholds Sth and τth are cho-
sen such that they return a number of links as close as
possible to the (known) number of existing links.
To quantify the eﬃciency of these criteria for uncover-
ing the real connectivity of the network we use the fol-
lowing measures
• True negatives (TN): number of non-existing links
which are correctly classiﬁed as not existing, rela-
tive to the number of non-existing links;
• False negatives (FN): number of existing links
which are incorrectly classiﬁed as not existing, rel-
ative to the number of existing links;
• True positives (TP): number of existing links which
are correctly classiﬁed as existing, relative to the
number of existing links;
• False positives (FP): number of non-existing links
which are incorrectly classiﬁed as existing, relative
to the number of non-existing links.

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)T −τmax(cid:88)

t=1

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ,

The lagged cross-correlation is used to quantify the
similarity between the time series recorded from nodes i
and j , xi (t) and xj (t), with t ∈ [1, T ] and i, j ∈ [1, N ].
Speciﬁcally, each time series is ﬁrst normalized to zero-
mean and unit variance. Then, we calculate the Pearson
coeﬃcient,

Cij (τ ) =

1
T − τmax

xi (t) xj (t + τ )

(1)

varying τ in the interval [0, τmax ] with τmax = T /5 [6].
We deﬁne the lag, τij , between nodes i and j as the value
of τ that maximizes Cij (τ ), and we deﬁne the correlation
strength, Sij , as Sij ≡ Cij (τij ) = maxτ Cij (τ ).
Next, we test whether the information contained in
the matrices τij and Sij is useful for inferring the ex-
isting links. We deﬁne two thresholds, one for the lags,
τth , and one for the correlation strengths, Sth , and use
the following criteria for classifying the links between the
existing and the non-existing ones.

1. SIM: Only the similarity measure (CC) is used to
infer the links. The link between i and j exists
(A∗
ij = 1) if Sij > Sth , else, the link does not exist
(A∗
ij = 0).

We also quantify the global success of the inference
method by calculating the total wrongly predicted exis-
tent, FP, and non-existent, FN, links relative to the total
number of links:

∆ =

2
N (N − 1)

|Aij − A∗
ij | =

F N + F P
N (N − 1)/2

. (2)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

i

j>i

Finally, since both τij and Sij depend on the length of
the segment, T , of the time series, and of the maximum
lag, τmax , we analyze if the results are robust with respect
to the choice of these parameters.

RESULTS

In Fig. 1 we show the values of the similarity measure,
Sij , [see Eq. (1)] and the corresponding lag, τij separating
the links that exist (Aij = 1, left column panels) and the
links that do not exist (Aij = 0, right column panels).
We clearly observe a diﬀerent variation as the coupling
strength is increased: for the existing links, Sij tends to
increase faster in comparison with the non-existing links,
and the opposite happens with τij .
Next, we show how including the lag information into
the bivariate analysis for the network inference can be

3

FIG. 1. Analysis of experimental data (N = 12 R¨ossler elec-
tronic oscillators coupled in a random network): comparison
of the values of the similarity measure, Sij , and lags , τij ,
of the existing links [panels (a) and (c), respectively] and of
the non-existing links [panels (b) and (d), respectively]. It is
observed that the variation of Sij and τij with the coupling
tends to be diﬀerent: for the existing links, Sij increases faster
(and τij decreases faster) than for the non-existing links. In
panels (a), (b) the solid lines indicate the value of the sim-
ilarity measure averaged over all (existing and non-existing)
links.

useful. Figure 2 displays the diﬀerent types of errors
that are made when applying the criteria described in
Sec. . We see that the SIM and AND only diﬀer for weak
coupling, but as the coupling increases, the number of
correctly inferred links and mistakes made are the same
for the two criteria. At weak coupling, adding the lag
information (AND) improves the detection of the exist-
ing links (true positives), at the cost of also improving
the detection of not-existing links (false positives). When
considering the total mistakes, as deﬁned in Eq. (2), we
can see in Fig. 3 that the AND criteria produces, at low
coupling, more mistakes than the SIM criteria. Conse-
quently, in this system the lag information is helpful, at
low coupling, to decrease particular types of mistakes of
the inference process. However, using similarity values
alone is better if the main goal is to minimize the total
number of mistakes, i.e., the sum of wrongly predicted
existing, FP, and non-existing, FN, links.
Interestingly, the OR criteria gives very diﬀerent re-
sults: avoids the false positives at the cost of giving a
large number of false negatives. This is due to the fact
that, regardless of the coupling strength, many τij values
are small for both, existing and non-existing links (see
Fig. 1).
The analysis of how relevant the particular choice of T
and τmax is, indicates that these results are robust. In
Fig. 4 we consider a given coupling strength (k = 0.1) and
change the length of the segment, T , of the time series,
while in Fig. 5 we change the interval of lag values where
we search for the maximum of the cross correlation. In
both cases we see that for T and τmax large enough, the
number of FPs, TPs, FNs, and TNs are independent of

FIG. 2. Quantitative comparison of the inference of the net-
work obtained with the three criteria described in Sec. : SIM
(*), AND (squares) and OR (triangles). The analysis is per-
formed in six non-superposed segments of T = 5000 data
points each. In each segment a network is inferred and then
the true positives (TPs), false positives (FPs), true negatives
(TNs) and false negatives (FNs) are calculated. The symbols
and the error bars indicate the corresponding mean values
and standard deviations, computed from the TP, FP, TN and
FN values obtained in the six segments.

FIG. 3. Comparison of the total number of mistakes, as de-
ﬁned in Eq. (2), for the three inference criteria: SIM (*), AND
(squares) and OR (triangles).

the choice of T and τmax .

CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

We have explored the possibility of using the lag in-
formation from pairwise cross-correlation for improving
the inference of the connectivity of a system composed
by interacting units. We have limited the study to a
simple situation: the number of units and the number
of links between pairs of units are known, and the links
either exist or do not exist (i.e., they are undirected and
unweighted).
We have used data recorded from by 12 electronic
R¨ossler chaotic oscillators, coupled in a random network
that has 19 links. We have found that lag information
can be useful for reducing certain types of mistakes, but it
does not improve network inference when all the mistakes
are added up. In particular, we ﬁnd that we can decrease
the number of false positive detections and detect all true
negatives in a robust way – independent of the coupling

4

links and network size. However, a set of Sth and τth
values that returned the target number of links was not
always found. A possible way to improve the inference
method is by considering two independent thresholds;
however, an important consideration is the shape of the
distributions the Sij and τij values: if they are bimodal
or long-tailed, there might not be any combination of
thresholds that returns the target number of links, be-
cause a small variation of one of the thresholds might
result in either too many or too few links being classiﬁed
as existent.
In a realistic situation the number of existing links is
unknown. Therefore, choosing a set of thresholds Sth and
τth that return a pre-deﬁned number of links is not an ap-
propriated inference strategy. In this situation a possible
alternative for using lag information for network infer-
ence is by taking into account how the lags and the sim-
ilarity measures vary with the coupling strength. Here
we have not used the fact that when the link between
units i and j indeed exists, Sij (τij ) tends to increase
(decrease) with the coupling faster than when the link
does not exist. However, classifying links according to
the variation of Sij and τij with the coupling, increases
the data requirements, as the values of Sij and τij will
need to be compared for diﬀerent coupling conditions. In
addition, in systems with non-instantaneous interactions
(i.e., coupling delays) or in systems where the units dis-
play periodic behavior, the lag information will not be
useful for network inference because in such systems the
units can synchronize with lags between them which do
not have a clear relation with the underlying interactions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

C. M. acknowledges partial support from Spanish
MINECO (FIS2015-66503-C3-2-P) and from the pro-
gram ICREA ACADEMIA of Generalitat de Catalunya.
NR acknowledges the support from the 4th CSIC MIA
2017 (id 194) program, Uruguay. Both authors grate-
fully acknowledge R. Sevilla-Escoboza and J. M. Buld´u
for the permission to analyse the experimental data sets
in [6] and [28].

∗ cristina.masoller@upc.edu
[1] A. A. Margolin,
I. Nemenman, K. Basso,
et al.
“ARACNE: An algorithm for the reconstruction of gene
regulatory networks in a mammalian cellular context”,
BMC Bioinformatics 7, (2006) S7.
[2] M. Timme, “Revealing network connectivity from re-
sponse dynamics”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, (2007) 224101.
[3] W. X. Wang, Y. C. Lai, C. Grebogi, et al. “Network re-
construction based on evolutionary-game data via com-
pressive sensing”, Phys. Rev. X 1, (2011) 021021.

FIG. 4. Robustness of the results obtained with the three
inference criteria, with respect to the length, T , of the data
segment for coupling strength k = 0.1. For k = 0 there is no
eﬀect of T (not shown).

FIG. 5. Robustness of the results obtained with the three in-
ference criteria, with respect to the length, τmax , of the inter-
val where we search for the maximum of the cross-correlation,
normalized to the length of the data segment. The coupling
strength is k = 0.1; for k = 0 there is no eﬀect of τmax (not
shown).

strength value – when using an OR criterion. Regarding
the total number of errors, guided by Fig. 3 we conclude
that, in our system, for weak coupling the OR criterion
is the best option, while for intermediate coupling SIM
performs the same as AND and both outperform OR. If
the coupling is large enough to synchronize the system, it
is not possible, using these criteria, to infer the network.
In general, a drawback of including the lag information
is that one needs to select two inference thresholds, Sth ,
for the similarity values, and τth , for the lags. Here we
used the simplest approach: we varied them simultane-
ously [Sth was increased linearly from min(Sij ) while τth
was decreased linearly from max(τij )], and the pair of
values Sth and τth that returned a number of links closer
to the known number of existing links were used for the
inference. This approach requires a minimal knowledge
from the network, namely, its link density – number of

[4] N. Rubido, A. C. Marti, E. Bianco-Martinez, et al. “Ex-
act detection of direct links in networks of interacting
dynamical units”, New J. Phys. 16, (2014) 093010.
[5] E. Bianco-Mart´ınez, N. Rubido, Ch. G. Antonopoulos,
and M. S. Baptista, “Successful network inference from
time-series data using mutual information rate”, Chaos
26, 043102 (2015).
[6] G. Tirabassi, R. Sevilla-Escoboza, J. M. Buld´u and C.
Masoller,“Inferring the connectivity of coupled oscillators
from time series statistical similarity analysis”, Sci. Rep.
5, (2015) 10829.
[7] J. F. Donges, J. Heitzig, B. Beronov, et al. “Uniﬁed func-
tional network and nonlinear time series analysis for com-
plex systems science: The pyunicorn package”, Chaos 25,
(2015) 113101.
[8] W. Wiedermann, J. F. Donges, J. Kurths, et al. “Spa-
tial network surrogates for disentangling complex system
structure from spatial embedding of nodes”, Phys. Rev.
E 93, (2016) 042308.
[9] A. Pikovsky, “Reconstruction of a neural network from
a time series of ﬁring rates”, Phys. Rev. E 93, (2016)
062313.
[10] R. Cestnik and M. Rosenblum, “Reconstructing networks
of pulse-coupled oscillators from spike trains”, Phys. Rev.
E 96, (2017) 012209.
[11] E. A. Martin, J. Hlinka, A. Meinke, et al. “Network Infer-
ence and Maximum Entropy Estimation on Information
Diagrams”, Sci. Rep. 7, (2017) 7062.
[12] B. J. Stolz, H. A. Harrington, and M. A. Porter, “Per-
sistent homology of time-dependent functional networks
constructed from coupled time series”, Chaos 27, (2017)
047410.
[13] J. Casadiego, N. Nitzan, S. Hallerberg et al. “Model-free
inference of direct network interactions from nonlinear
collective dynamics”, Nat. Comm. 8, (2017) 2192.
[14] E. S. C. Ching and H. C. Tam, “Reconstructing links in
directed networks from noisy dynamics”, Phys. Rev. E
95, (2017) 010301.
[15] L. Li, D. Xu, H. Peng, et al. “Reconstruction of complex
network based on the noise via QR decomposition and

5

compressed sensing”, Sci. Rep. 7, (2017) 15036.
[16] V. M. Eguiluz, D. R. Chialvo, G. A. Cecchi, et al. “Scale-
free brain functional networks”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,
(2005) 018102.
[17] B. T. Bullmore and O. Sporns, “Complex brain networks:
graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional
systems”, Nat. Rev. Neuroscience 10, (2009) 186–198.
[18] K. Lehnertz, G. Ansmann, S. Bialonski, et al. “Evolving
networks in the human epileptic brain”, Physica D 267,
(2014) 7–15.
[19] K. Yamasaki, A. Gozolchiani and S. Havlin, “Climate
networks around the globe are signiﬁcantly aﬀected by
El Nino”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, (2008) 228501.
[20] A. A. Tsonis and K. L. Swanson, “Topology and pre-
dictability of El Nino and La Nina networks”, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 100, (2008) 228502.
[21] J. F. Donges, Y. Zou, N. Marwan and J. Kurths, Eur.
Phys. J. Spec. Top. 174, (2009) 157–179.
[22] S. Bialonski, M. T. Horstmann, and K. Lehnertz, “From
brain to earth and climate systems: Small-world interac-
tion networks or not?”, Chaos 20, (2010) 013134.
[23] J. I. Deza, M. Barreiro and C. Masoller, “Inferring inter-
dependencies in climate networks constructed at inter-
annual, intra-season and longer time scales”, Eur. Phys.
J. Spec. Top. 222, (2013) 511–523.
[24] J. D. Olden and B. D. Neﬀ, “Cross-correlation bias in
lag analysis of aquatic time series”, Marine Biology 138,
1063–1070 (2001).
[25] C. Curme, Lagged correlation networks (Doctoral disser-
tation, Boston University, 2015).
[26] P. Damos, “A stepwise algorithm to detect signiﬁcant
time lags in ecological time series in terms of auto-
correlation functions and ARMA model optimisation of
pest population seasonal outbreaks”, Stochastic Environ-
mental Research and Risk Assessment 30(7), 1961–1980
(2016).
[27] A. Pikovsky, M. Rosenblum, and J. Kurths, Synchroniza-
tion: A universal concept in nonlinear sciences (Cam-
bridge University Press, 2001).
[28] R. Sevilla-Escoboza and J. M. Buld´u, Data in Brief 7,
(2016) 1185–1189.

